---
title: "Mortality Thresholds of Juvenile Trees to Drought and Heatwaves: Implications for Forest Regeneration across a Landscape Gradient"
collection: talks
type: "Talk"
permalink: /talks/2022-12-02-talk-1
venue: "University of Arizona, School of Natural Resources and the Environment"
date: 2022-12-02
location: "Tucson, Arizona"
---

[Watch here](http://exampleurl.com)

Tree loss is increasing rapidly due to drought- and heat- related mortality and intensifying 16 fire activity. Consequently, the fate of many forests depends on the ability of juvenile trees to 17 withstand heightened climate and disturbance anomalies. Extreme climatic events, such as 18 droughts and heatwaves, are increasing in frequency and severity, and trees in mountainous 19 regions must contend with these landscape-level climate episodes. Recent research focuses on 20 how mortality of individual tree species may be driven by drought and heatwaves, but how 21 juvenile mortality under these conditions would vary among species spanning an elevational 22 gradient—given concurrent variation in climate, ecohydrology, and physiology—remains 23 unclear. We address this knowledge gap by implementing a growth chamber study, imposing 24 extreme drought with and without a compounding heatwave, for juveniles of five species that 25 span a montane elevational gradient in the southwestern United States. Overall, the length of a 26 progressive drought required to trigger mortality differed by up to 20 weeks among species. 27 Inclusion of a heatwave hastened mean time to mortality for all species by about one week. 28 Lower elevation species that grow in warmer ambient conditions died earlier (Pinus ponderosa 29 in 10 weeks, Pinus edulis in 14 weeks) than did higher elevation species from cooler ambient 30 conditions (Picea engelmannii and Pseudotsuga menziesii in 19 weeks, and Pinus flexilis in 30 31 weeks). When exposed to a heatwave in conjunction with drought, mortality advanced 32 significantly only for species from cooler ambient conditions (Pinus flexilis: 2.7 weeks earlier; 33 Pseudotsuga menziesii: 2.0 weeks earlier). Cooler ambient temperatures and associated 34 differences in ecohydrology-related soil evaporation may have provided a buffer against 35 moisture loss during drought, potentially overriding expected differences in drought tolerance 36 due to tree physiology. Our study suggests that droughts will play a leading role in juvenile tree 37 mortality and will most directly impact species at warmer climate thresholds, with heatwaves in 38 tandem with drought potentially exacerbating mortality especially of high elevation species. 39 These responses are relevant for assessing the potential success of both natural and managed 40 reforestation, as differential juvenile survival following episodic extreme events will determine 41 future landscape-scale vegetation trajectories under changing climate.
